# Google/Firebase Analytics Plugin

This plugin is a fork of the Google Analytics [OctoberCMS](http://octobercms.com) plugin. The main difference is that unlike that plugin, this one uses Google Analytics Data API (GA4) which gives both web and app data. Secondly, this plugin abstracts the browsers, top pages, traffic goals, traffic overview and traffic sources reportwidgets into a line, bar, pie\* and percentage\* charts (credit to [Scott Bedard](https://github.com/scottbedard/analyticsextension) for this).

\* Still under-development

## Configuration

### Configure the API

To get started using Google Analytics API, you need to first [create or select a project in the Google Developers Console and enable the API](https://console.developers.google.com/start/api?id=analytics&credential=client_key). Using this link guides you through the process and activates the Google Analytics API automatically.

Alternatively, you can activate the Google Analytics API yourself in the Developers Console by doing the following:

1. Open the [Credentials page](https://console.developers.google.com/project/_/apiui/credential).

1. Select the **Overview** menu item and enable the **Analytics API**.

In either case, you should end up on the **Credentials** page and can create your project's credentials from here.

#### Create a client ID

1. Open the [**Service accounts** section](https://console.developers.google.com/projectselector/permissions/serviceaccounts) of the Developers Console's **Permissions** page.

1. Click **Create service account**.

1. In the **Create service account** window, type a name for the service account, eg: `OctoberCMS Analytics`.

1. Place a tick in the box  **Furnish a new private key** and select **JSON** for the **Key type**.

1. Then, click **Create**.

1. A `.json` file will be generated, this is the private key for your account. Accept the download and save it to your computer.

1. Click **Close**.

1. You should see an email ending with `iam.gserviceaccount.com`, if not select the **Permissions tab**. Copy this address to your clipboard.

### Configure Google Analytics

1. In a new tab, navigate to the main [Google Analytics site](https://www.google.com/analytics/web/) and select the property you want to track.

1. Click the **Admin** main menu tab at the top. Select the **Property > User Management** menu item.

1. *Paste the email address from the clipboard* in to the field **Add permissions for** and make sure the permission is set to **Read & Analyse**. Click **Add**.

1. Click the **Admin** main menu tab again and select **Property > Property Settings** from the menu. *Copy to your clipboard* the Property ID (should be a number).

### Configure October back-end area

1. Open your October back-end administration area and open **Settings > Google Analytics**.

1. *Paste the Property ID from the clipboard* in to the field **Property ID**.

1. Upload the previously downloaded `.json` private key file to the **Private key** field.

1. Specify the **Web Measurement ID** (eg `G-G1MMEAPS5`) and **Domain name** values if you are going to use the plugin's built-in tracking component. To find this code, select **Admin > Data Streams > Web** from the Google Analytics menu.

1. If Tracking is not working initially, enter the value `auto` for the **Domain name** field. This is a fix for newborn Google Analytics accounts.

## Adding the tracking code

Using the tracking code provided by the plugin is optional - the reporting part does not depend on whether you track your traffic with the built-in tracker or with a custom code generated by Google Analytics tools. 

To add the plugin's tracking code to your website just drop the Google Analytics Tracker component to your CMS layout and add this code to the layout code after the page tag:

```php
{% page %}
{% component 'googleTracker' %}
```

## Troubleshooting

### Fix for Windows / XAMPP

**cURL error 60: SSL certificate problem: unable to get local issuer certificate**

1. Follow this link: http://curl.haxx.se/ca/cacert.pem and save it in a file called `cacert.pem`.

1. Open your `php.ini` file insert or edit the following line: 
    ```
    curl.cainfo = "[pathtothisfile]\cacert.pem"
    ```

1. Restart Apache

### Popup message simply saying "error" when trying to add the JSON key file.

Some ad-blockers (such as Chrome's uBlock Origin extension or Firefox's own built-in algorithms) may prevent the uploading of the JSON file key. Disabling these, or whitelisting the October CMS website, may resolve this issue for you.

### Newly added dimensions/metrics do not show up in the widget properties dropdown

If you added custom dimensions/metrics or if Google did so, it would normally take 10 days for those to appear as these are cached every 10 days to speed up dashboard widget loads. If you need this to be refreshed immediately, you can manually clear the cache by running the artisan command:

```
php artisan cache:clear
```
